2022q4/gcc.adoc: Add report (#544)
freebsd/freebsd-quarterly: 2022q4/gcc.adoc

=== GCC: Update GCC default version to version 12

Links: +
link:https://gcc.gnu.org[GCC Project] URL: link:https://gcc.gnu.org[https://gcc.gnu.org] +
link:https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-11/[GCC 11 release series] URL: link:https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-11/[https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-11/] +
link:https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-12/[GCC 12 release series] URL: link:https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-12/[https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-12/]

Contact: Lorenzo Salvadore <salvadore@FreeBSD.org> +

 * The GCC default version has now been updated to version 12.
   Thank you very much to antoine@ for running the necessary exp-runs and to all the contributors, maintainers and committers involved in the process.

>    As it has been noted last quarter, for every major version of GCC FreeBSD usually waits for the release of the second minor version to update GCC default version. However next time I would like to attempt to update the default version as soon as the first minor version of GCC 13 is out. The rationale for waiting the second minor release is to wait for other operating systems (in particular Linux distributions) to find the bugs, report them, and fix them, so that FreeBSD could focus mainly on FreeBSD specific cases. But this also means that upstream software only hear from FreeBSD rarely and mostly when it concerns FreeBSD only, thus our operating system risks to be considered as minor and unimportant for them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   As it has been noted last quarter, for every major version of GCC FreeBSD usually waits for the release of the second minor version to update GCC default version. However next time I would like to attempt to update the default version as soon as the first minor version of GCC 13 is out. The rationale for waiting the second minor release is to wait for other operating systems (in particular Linux distributions) to find the bugs, report them, and fix them, so that FreeBSD could focus mainly on FreeBSD specific cases. But this also means that upstream software developers only hear from FreeBSD rarely and mostly when it concerns FreeBSD only, thus our operating system risks being considered minor and unimportant for them.
```

   My hope is that software authors can value supporting FreeBSD more as the number of its contributions to other projects also increases. Of course I understand that this will imply more work for all ports maintainers and I will do my best to help them as much as I can.
   link:https://bugs.freebsd.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=265948[https://bugs.freebsd.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=2659548]

 * A conflict preventing the installation of multiple versions of GCC has been solved, so now lang/gcc11 and lang/gcc12 can be installed at the same time. This was particularly important for the update of the GCC default version, since a few ports have been kept to compile with GCC 11 for now.

>    Note however that at the moment only one -devel GCC port at the time can be installed on your system. This is because I have patched the standard ports only: for the -devel port I expect upstream to fix the issue soon, by using one of the patches link:https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=101491[submitted by a FreeBSD user] or link:https://gcc.gnu.org/pipermail/gcc-patches/2022-November/606450.html[by myself], or using some other solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Note however that at the moment only one -devel GCC port at the time can be installed on your system. This is because I have patched the standard ports only: for the -devel port I expect upstream to fix the issue soon, by using a link:https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=101491[patch submitted by a FreeBSD user] or link:https://gcc.gnu.org/pipermail/gcc-patches/2022-November/606450.html[my own patch], or using some other solution.
```
Making link text more meaningful for screenreaders reading a list of links outside main text.

=== GCC: Update GCC default version to version 12

Links: +
link:https://gcc.gnu.org[GCC Project] URL: link:https://gcc.gnu.org[https://gcc.gnu.org] +
link:https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-11/[GCC 11 release series] URL: link:https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-11/[https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-11/] +
link:https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-12/[GCC 12 release series] URL: link:https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-12/[https://gcc.gnu.org/gcc-12/]

Contact: Lorenzo Salvadore <salvadore@FreeBSD.org> +

>  * GCC default version has now been updated to version 12.

Reviewer: s/GCC/The GCC/

   Thank you very much to antoine@ for running the necessary exp-runs and to all the contributors, maintainers and committers involved in the process.

>    As it has been noted last quarter, for every major version of GCC FreeBSD usually waits for the release of the second minor version to update GCC default version. However next time I would like to attempt to update the default version as soon as the first major version of GCC 13 is out. The rationale for waiting the second minor release is to wait for other operating systems (in particular Linux distributions) to find the bugs, report them and fix them, so that FreeBSD could focus mainly on FreeBSD specific cases. But this also means that upstream softwares only hear from FreeBSD rarely and mostly when it concerns FreeBSD only, thus our operating system risks to be considered as minor and unimportant for them.

Reviewer: In "as soon as the first major version of GCC 13 is out", do you mean 13.0? If you do, you probably need to s/major version/minor release/ (or just simplify to "as soon as GCC 13.0 is out").

In "find the bugs, report them and fix them" you need another comma before "and".

In "upstream softwares only hear from FreeBSD", either s/softwares/software/ or s/softwares/software developers/.

Author: Yes, I meant from the first minor version (which is 13.1: GCC starts counting minor versions from .1 and .0 is used for development versions only).

   link:https://bugs.freebsd.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=265948[https://bugs.freebsd.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=2659548]

 * A conflict preventing the installation of multiple versions of GCC has been solved, so now lang/gcc11 and lang/gcc12 can be installed at the same time. This was particularly important for the update of the GCC default version, since a few ports have been kept to compile with GCC 11 for now.
   Note however that at the moment only one -devel GCC port at the time can be installed on your system. This is because I have patched the standard ports only: for the -devel port I expect upstream to fix the issue soon, by using one of the patches link:https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=101491[submitted by a FreeBSD user] or link:https://gcc.gnu.org/pipermail/gcc-patches/2022-November/606450.html[by myself], or using some other solution.
   link:https://bugs.freebsd.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=257060[https://bugs.freebsd.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=257060]

>  * D language has been enabled in lang/gcc11 and lang/gcc11-devel thanks to diizzy.

Reviewer: s/D language/The D language/

>    This could be done easily for GCC 11 only as, starting from GCC 12, the D compiler GDC will need a working GDC to be built. I plan to include D support for higher versions of GCC too.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean in the first sentence. If you mean it was hard(er) for GCC 12, I'd state that explicitly.

s/will need a working GDC to be built/needs a working GDC for building/

Author: I tried to rephrase it, I hope it is clearer now. D is not enabled for GCC 12 at the moment because it is harder to enable it in there than in the GCC 11 case.
